The 2002 Acura 3.2TL is an excellent value. The only option is a DVD-based navigation system that holds the entire US map on one DVD disc. The features that are optional on other cars in this segment are standard here.  
 
Value  
 
The list of standard equipment is very long. ABS, traction control, automatic transmission with manual shifting capability, automatic climate control, leather and simulated wood trim, keyless entry, security system with panic alarm, Bose stereo system with both CD and cassette, heated power front seats, cruise control, power locks, windows and mirrors, steering wheel mounted radio controls, high intensity headlights, cruise control, sunroof, alloy wheels, front and side airbags.  
 
I did not include other small goodies like grid antenna and leather gear shift knob and steering wheel, etc.  
 
Engine  
 
The engine is 3.2 liter V-6 with Honda’s VTEC variable valve timing and lift technology that uses two-lobe camshafts and switches between lobes depending on the engine RPMs to increase torque and power. This V-6 produces 225 hp and 216 lb-ft of torque. There is a new TL Type-S model that gets 260 hp, has 17" 5-spoke wheels and stiffer suspension.  
 
The engine requires premium gas and the fuel economy is 19 mpg city / 29 mpg highway.  
 
Transmission  
 
The car is not available with manual transmission, but you can shift the standard 5-speed automatic manually if you wish. Unfortunately, automatic transmission, even with manual shifting, is no substitute for manual gearbox – the torque converter “eats” some power plus you still have less control.  
 
If you hit the rev limiter, it upshifts, even if you don't want it to. Mash the pedal and it downshifts. What's the point of having manual control then? However if you drive in heavy traffic a lot, the auto will be quite useful.  
 
Styling  
 
Some people might like it, but I would prefer something more distinctive. Although the exterior was improved recently, the rear is still bland. Interior is nice, however, except the steering wheel that looks too bulky and the wood that looks too fake. The fit and finish are very good and materials look fine for the price.  
 
The instrumentation cluster is excellently lighted at night and the HID headlights provide enough illumination. The cabin space is aplenty and ride comfort and visibility are great. The car employs a floor-mounted parking brake, which I don’t like.  
 
It’s A Front Drive Thing  
 
The TL is a front-driver, which makes it better suited for slippery conditions. The torque steer is virtually nonexistent. The acceleration is quite fast, however the automatic transmission "eats" some power. In fact, BMW and Audi manage to go faster with less power. It might be due to the gearing and weight. However, I wouldn’t call TL slow – it is faster than a lot of cars in its price range.  
 
Safety And Pricing  
 
Although, a lot of safety equipment is standard, what really counts is how car withstands the crash. If you go to crashtest.com, you will see that TL was rated worse than it’s German competition – Audi A4, BMW 3 Series and Benz C-class.  
 
However, they are substantially more expensive in their higher trims (A4 3.0, 330 and C320) with the same equipment as TL. The lower trim levels (A4 1.8T, 325 and C240) have less power, substantially less equipment  
 
The Lexus IS300 is probably TL’s closest competitor, yet IS300 is better suited for younger people who want a sporty car. IS300 is a rear-wheel drive and I think it lookos better. The TL is a car for those who want good value, reliability and comfort.  
 
Bottom Line  
 
Overall, the TL is a good value with lots of standard equipment and smooth engine. But styling and the crash protection could be better.  
